#summary List of keywords
<wiki:toc max_depth="3" />
= Introduction =

This page lists Object Icon's builtin keywords.

== &ascii ==
`&ascii : c`

The cset of ascii characters.

== &clock ==
`&clock : s`

The current time of day, for example "15:38:27".

== &cset ==
`&cset : c`

The cset of all 8-bit characters.

== &current ==
`&current : C`

The current co-expression

== &date ==
`&date : s`

The current date in the formay "yyyy/mm/dd"; for example "2009/11/06".

== &dateline ==
`&dateline : s`

The current date and time, for example "Friday, November 6, 2009  3:38 pm".

== &digits ==
`&digits : c`

The cset of digits 0-9

== &dump ==
`&dump : i`

If non-zero, causes dump on termination

== &error ==
`&error : i`

If non-zero, non-fatal run-time errors are converted to failure, setting `&errornumber`, `&errortext` and `&errorvalue`.

== &errornumber ==
`&errornumber : i`

Run-time error number

== &errortext ==
`&errortext : s`

Run-time error message text

== &errorvalue ==
`&errorvalue : x`

Run-time error offending value

== &fail ==
`&fail`

Simply fails.

== &features ==
`&features : s1,s2,...,sn`

Generate a sequence of strings describing implementation features

== &file ==
`&file : s`

The current source code file name

== &host ==
`&host : s`

A string identifying the host computer

== &lcase ==
`&lcase : c`

The cset of lower case letters a-z

== &letters ==
`&letters : c`

The cset of all letters A-Za-z

== &level ==
`&level : i`

The level of current procedure call

== &line ==
`&line : i`

The current source code line number

== &main ==
`&main : C`

The main co-expression

== &maxlevel ==
`&maxlevel : i`

The maximum allowed procedure call depth, ie the maximum allowed value of `&level`.

== &no ==
`&no : n`

A constant for representing "false", "off" etc.  It has the null value

== &null ==
`&null : n`

The null value

== &pos ==
`&pos : i`

String scanning position

== &progname ==
`&progname : s`

The file name of the executing program

== &random ==
`&random : i`

Random number seed

== &source ==
`&source : C`

The activator of current co-expression

== &subject ==
`&subject : s`

String scanning subject

== &time ==
`&time : i`

Current run time in milliseconds

== &trace ==
`&trace : i`

If non-zero, trace procedure calls

== &ucase ==
`&ucase : c`

The cset of upper case letters A-Z

== &uset ==
`&uset : c`

The cset of all unicode codepoints

== &version ==
`&version : s`

String describing the veersion of Object Icon

== &why ==
`&why : s`

Reason for failure

== &yes ==
`&yes : i`

A constant for representing "true", "on" etc.  It has the value 1.


